[11.0 P5] Blazor Preview 5 updates (#37206)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/components/quickgrid.md

Reviewer: I realize this is outside of the PR scope, but I'll mention.  Since we are checknig if Page even has a value, should it be declared nullable" `int? Page`

Author: I can address this, but it will need to be in like 30 minutes. If you want, I can patch it on a patch PR. Otherwise, we just need to wait another 30 minutes. I have a prior (quick) family obligation that I can't get out of.

Reviewer: Patch after is fine.  Alerady approved.  Up to you.

Author: My recollection is just that it goes to zero if not present in this case. There are a few examples that I need to look at, however, to make sure that they're all addressing this the same way. We might also need to make a remark about behavioral difference between nullable and non-nullable.

Yeah ... I recommend let's go ahead and merge this now. I'm going to run over and take care of the family situation. I'll be back soon and ping you probably in like an hour or so with a PR on this.

Author: I'll also add the `NavigationManager` to the earlier example.

Sorry for the poor timing! I'll get your feedback resolved as soon as I get back to the house. 🏃‍♂️🏃‍♂️🏃‍♂️🏃‍♂️

To implement a `QuickGrid` component:

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-11.0"

<!-- UPDATE 11.0 - API Browser cross-link -->

> * Specify tags for the `QuickGrid` component in Razor markup (`<QuickGrid>...</QuickGrid>`).

Reviewer 2: There is no note here about `QueryParameterNamePrefix`

Author: It's on Line 40.

... and then down in the *Multiple grids on the same page* section.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I am blind, haha

There aren't current plans to extend QuickGrid with features that full-blown commercial grids tend to offer, for example, hierarchical rows, drag-to-reorder columns, or Excel-like range selections. If you require advanced features that you don't wish to develop on your own, continue using third-party grids.

## Page items with a `Paginator` component

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-11.0"

> The `QuickGrid` component can page data from the data source.

Reviewer 2: What does this sentence mean? I don't understand :(

Author: It refers to paging data (i.e., `PaginationState`, `Paginator` component) from the source of the data.

```razor
<PropertyColumn Property="..." Sortable="true" />
```

In the running app, sort the QuickGrid column by selecting the rendered column title.

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-11.0"

Sort state in the URL uses the column's `Title` property as the identifier. The `sort` query parameter is set to `column.Title` (example for column title `Name`: `?sort=Name&order=asc`). On a URL change, `QuickGrid` matches the `sort` value back to a column by executing `_columns.FirstOrDefault(c => c.Title == sort.ColumnTitle)`. If no column title matches, the sort is ignored and the grid falls back to its default sort.

Renaming a column's `Title` is a URL-breaking change. Any bookmarked or shared URLs containing the old title in the `sort` parameter stop matching, and the grid silently falls back to the default sort instead of sorting by the intended column. For `PropertyColumn`, the `Title` defaults to the property name (example: `Property="@(p => p.FirstName)"` produces `Title="First Name"`), so renaming the property or explicitly changing the `Title` parameter both break existing URLs.

> [!NOTE]

> > Using the default URL-based navigation, selectors targeting `button.col-title` must also target `a.col-title`, and `nav button`/`nav button:disabled` require `nav a`/`nav a[aria-disabled="true"]`. The built-in QuickGrid stylesheet provides both by default.

Reviewer 2: If this not is only for >11, then I would rephrase it like "if you want classes to be shareable between URL-based and inner-state based pagination", because right now it sounds strange? I don't know, I don't understand where `button.col-title` came from. Or maybe a not that if you update to 11 then you need to change css?

Author: I'll research this and get back to you.

Author: It looks like I got that from your "Risks" area in the API proposal at ...

[Risks](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/66830#issue-4517151014)

> Breaking change: <button> → <a> in rendered HTML — when the feature flag is enabled (default), sort headers and paginator controls change element type. Custom CSS targeting button.col-title or nav button will break. Developers can opt out via the AppContext switch.

Would this be a good change? ...

```suggestion
> If you want to share stylesheet classes between URL-based and inner-state based pagination, selectors targeting `button.col-title` must also target `a.col-title`, and `nav button`/`nav button:disabled` require `nav a`/`nav a[aria-disabled="true"]`. The built-in QuickGrid stylesheet provides both by default.
```

Reviewer 2: Thank you! That's perfect.

        new Character(10, "Ellie Sattler"),
        new Character(11, "Leela")
    }.AsQueryable();

    private void HandleRowClick(Character character)
    {

>         NavigationManager.NavigateTo(

Reviewer: I don't see where `NavigationManager` is defined or how it should be.  Is ths code example meant to be only a partial example?  Maybe I am just misunderstanding. If you think it is how it should be then carry on, this is new to me.

Author: Stand-by and sorry for the delay. I was called away from my PC.

Author: Great catch. I'll update to include it on the next commit.
